Data Visualization A3 Writeup
Helena Spencer & Jonathan Nottingham

For this assignment, we wanted to answer the question of which countries have had the most success through the years since the conception of the FIFA World Cup. Having been inspired by the Barry Bonds graphic that we viewed in class, which we found to be a very unique and captivating way of displaying a narrative, we decided early on that we wanted to create a visualization regarding sports that could show some sort of evolution of either a major sports league or major athlete. After deciding on soccer and specifically the history of the world cup, our primary goals were to not only showcase the most successful countries in international soccer competition, but also to showcase the history of the World Cup through the narrative of the countries that became champions since the event began in 1930. 

We entertained a couple of different design decisions for our goals, including different metrics and different types of designs. Some metrics we considered were total goals scored, success in other international competitions, and even popularity by country through the years. We ultimately decided on World Cup championships won because we believed it would make for the most captivating narrative, as the competition is the most highly-regarded and coveted indicator of international success in the sport. Drawing from many of the examples we viewed in class such as the indicators of climate change visualization and the Barry Bonds visualization, we initially wanted to pursue some sort of graphical representation, such as an animation of a line or bar graph that progressed throughout the years and showed growing bars or plotted points representing different countries. However, after giving it some more thought we wanted to attempt a more visually creative and appealing approach by graphing the progression of these statistics on an actual world map. We believed that this would add more depth to the visualization and make for a more interesting viewing experience, as being able to see the actual country is a feature that brings a greater degree of visual power and significance as opposed to a point or bar representing that country. Our plan to implement this was to have a bar where the user could scroll through the years beginning at 1930 to view the success of each country at any given time, with this success being portrayed through darker gradients of color indicating more World Cup wins. 

Both group members contributed towards the synthesis of this idea, and there was a substantial amount of discussion and discourse over both what exactly should be displayed and how it should be displayed before deciding on our final idea. Because Helena felt more comfortable using Vega-Lite and Observable, she worked on the programming behind the actual visual map, while both Helena and Jonathan worked together to figure out how to best filter the data from our initial dataset. Jonathan was responsible for the qualitative portion of the assignment (this writeup). The development process was definitely longer and more tedious than what we had anticipated. We encountered the most problems with figuring out how to properly filter the data from our original World Cup Dataset (both conceptually and from a syntax standpoint) and how to reference this filtered data in the code behind the visual representation. The total amount of time spent on this assignment was roughly 18 people-hours (including Helena’s time spent in office hours). 
